Random rotation blog post content (#4019)
opensearch-project/project-website: _posts/2025-11-25-benefits_of_random_rotation.md

---
layout: post
title:  "The benefits of random rotation in quantized vector search"
authors:
 - tal
 - nmishra
 - ynaamad
 - finnrobl
 - vikash
 - vamshin

> date: 2025-11-24

Reviewer: Update publish date: 2025-12-29

categories:
 - technical-post
meta_keywords: vector search, quantization, rotation, random rotation

> meta_description: OpenSearch 3.2 introduced random rotation as a data standardizing transformation. This post explains the benefits of random rotation in quantized similarity search.

Reviewer: Updated meta: 
_meta_keywords:_ quantized vector search, vector search systems, random rotation in OpenSearch,  binary quantization, OpenSearch 3.2,  ANN search, quantized vector search, RAG, retrieval-augmented generation, search accuracy, data standardization, product quantization, similarity search

_meta_description:_  Discover how random rotation in OpenSearch 3.2 improves binary quantization accuracy by removing axis correlations without changing true distances in your data.

excerpt: Random rotation is a useful tool to make our data more standard before feeding it into an approximate nearest neighbor search algorithm. While it has a computational cost that needs to be taken into account, it can remove spurious axis correlations that lead to reduced accuracy.
has_math: true
has_science_table: true
---

Modern vector search systems, like those used in retrieval augmented generation (RAG) pipelines, need to handle a wide variety of datasets with rich and diverse structures and properties. It is often difficult to predict how a search algorithm would perform on a new dataset. One way to promote performance predictability is through transformations that standardize the data, making it more amenable to the approximate nearest neighbor (ANN) algorithm down the pipeline. 

> OpenSearch 3.2 introduces random rotation as a data standardizing transformation, which is helpful particularly in the context of [binary quantization](https://docs.opensearch.org/latest/vector-search/optimizing-storage/binary-quantization/#enhancing-search-quality-with-adc-and-rr). A random rotation simply rotates all our data and query vectors to a random orientation. The following is an example of an ellipsoidal dataset in two dimensions, before and after a random rotation (randomly chosen to be 130.6 degrees). 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
OpenSearch 3.2 introduced random rotation as a data standardizing transformation, which is helpful particularly in the context of [binary quantization](https://docs.opensearch.org/latest/vector-search/optimizing-storage/binary-quantization/#enhancing-search-quality-with-adc-and-rr). A random rotation simply rotates all data and query vectors to a random orientation. The following is an example of an ellipsoidal dataset in two dimensions, before and after a random rotation (randomly chosen to be 130.6 degrees). 
```

Importantly, the fact that the rotation is random does not mean its impact on the data is entirely unpredictable. On the contrary: due to strong probabilistic concentration, a random rotation is overwhelmingly likely to move any given point away from all of the axes. Intuitively, this is because the unit ball in $$\mathbb{R}^d$$ has $$d$$ axes but $$\exp(d)$$ volume. Hence, the probability that a point falls near an axis post-rotation behaves like $$d/\exp(d)$$, which tends to 0 quickly as $$d$$ grows. As a result, a random rotation can be seen as “standardizing” our data: it makes it very likely that almost all of the points are far away from the axes, thus making the performance of quantization algorithms like BQ more predictable, without changing the true distances and angles.

> Mathematically, a random rotation interacts particularly nicely with BQ in the following way. After a random rotation, the expected Hamming distance between every pair of points $$x,y\in\mathbb{R}^d$$  equals $$\frac{d}{\pi}\cdot\theta(x,y)$$, where $$\theta(x,y)$$ is the angle between $$x,y$$. This follows from the analysis of the classical SimHash algorithm and from the linearity of expectation. Thus, after a random rotation, the expected Hamming distance between the BQ codes of the two points is directly related to their angular distance, irrespective of how they originally happened to be positioned with respect to the quantization boundaries.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Mathematically, a random rotation interacts particularly nicely with BQ in the following way. After a random rotation, the expected Hamming distance between every pair of points $$x,y\in\mathbb{R}^d$$ equals $$\frac{d}{\pi}\cdot\theta(x,y)$$, where $$\theta(x,y)$$ is the angle between $$x,y$$. This follows from the analysis of the classical SimHash algorithm and from the linearity of expectation. Thus, after a random rotation, the expected Hamming distance between the BQ codes of the two points is directly related to their angular distance, irrespective of how they originally happened to be positioned with respect to the quantization boundaries.
```

> Let's see another example of detrimental axis correlations. To simulate a dataset highly correlated with the x-axis in two dimensions, we sample 10,000 points from a 2D Gaussian distribution with independent coordinates, with the x-coordinate sampled from $$N(0,1)$$ and the y-coordinate sampled from $$N(0,0.1)$$. This is the ellipsoidal dataset already shown in the beginning of this blog post. In the following figure, we highlight in orange the points that ended up with a different BQ code than their nearest neighbor, which is a bad event. After the rotation, due to eliminating the correlation with the x-axis, the number of bad events has decreased from 123 to 55---a 55% decrease in bad events.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's look at another example of detrimental axis correlations. To simulate a dataset highly correlated with the x-axis in two dimensions, we sample 10,000 points from a 2D Gaussian distribution with independent coordinates, with the x-coordinate sampled from $$N(0,1)$$ and the y-coordinate sampled from $$N(0,0.1)$$. This is the ellipsoidal dataset already shown in the beginning of this blog post. In the following figure, we highlight in orange the points that ended up with a different BQ code than their nearest neighbor, which is a bad event. After the rotation, due to eliminating the correlation with the x-axis, the number of bad events has decreased from 123 to 55---a 55% decrease in bad events.
```

This happens in higher dimensions as well. To see this, we again sample a dataset with independent 0-centered Gaussian coordinates, this time in 100 dimensions. The first coordinate has variance 1 and all other coordinates have variance 0.1. For every point $$x$$, we look at the rank of its true nearest neighbor when the points are sorted by Hamming distance of their BQ codes from $$x$$. This is the number of quantized candidates we need to scan in order to find the true nearest neighbor, so lower rank is better. The following table lists the quantiles over all points before and after a random rotation. We see that after a random rotation, the ranks are noticeably smaller. The median number of candidates we need to scan decreases by 12%, while for the 0.9-quantile---that is, the most difficult queries---it decreases by 26%. 

| Quantile | 0.1 | 0.2 | 0.3 | 0.4 | 0.5 | 0.6 | 0.7 | 0.8 | 0.9 |
|----------|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|
| NN rank before rotation | 10 | 30 | 63 | 110 | 186 | 302 | 495 | 956 | 1795 |
| NN rank after rotation | 9 | 25 | 55 | 97 | 164 | 265 | 421 | 678 | 1325 |

## The cost of random rotation

> A random rotation introduces some computational costs. Sampling a random rotation can be done in time $$O(d^3)$$---for an example implementation, see the [appendix](#appendix-how-to-sample-a-random-rotation). This needs to be done once during the indexing phase, and is typically acceptable in the dimensions used in modern large-scale vector search scenarios. Recent scientific literature contains several methods for faster approximate sampling of (approximate) rotation matrices, which can alleviate this running time in cases where it is a bottleneck. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A random rotation introduces some computational costs. Sampling a random rotation can be done in time $$O(d^3)$$---for an example implementation, see the [appendix](#appendix-how-to-sample-a-random-rotation). This needs to be done once during the indexing phase and is typically acceptable in the dimensions used in modern large-scale vector search scenarios. Recent scientific literature contains several methods for faster approximate sampling of (approximate) rotation matrices, which can alleviate this running time in cases where it is a bottleneck. 
```
